[article] Resource Optimization Guide (#1342)
qdrant/landing_page: qdrant-landing/content/articles/resource-optimization.md

**Example:**

```python
from qdrant_client import QdrantClient, models

client = QdrantClient(url="http://localhost:6333")
client.create_collection(
    collection_name="my_collection",
    vectors_config=models.VectorParams(size=300, distance=models.Distance.COSINE),
    shard_number=6  # Specify number of shards
)
```

---

**User-Defined Sharding:**

**User-Defined Sharding** allows you to take control of data placement by specifying a shard key. This feature is particularly useful in multi-tenant setups, as it enables the isolation of each tenant’s data within separate shards, ensuring better organization and enhanced data security.

**Example:**

```python
client.create_collection(
    collection_name="my_custom_sharded_collection",
    shard_number=1,
    sharding_method=models.ShardingMethod.CUSTOM
)
client.create_shard_key("my_custom_sharded_collection", "tenant_id")
```

---

When implementing user-defined sharding in Qdrant, two key parameters are critical to achieving efficient data distribution:

1. **Shard Key**:
    

>     The shard key determines how data points are distributed across shards. For example, using a key like tenant_idallows you to control how Qdrant partitions the data. Each data point added to the collection will be assigned to a shard based on the value of this key, ensuring logical isolation of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The shard key determines how data points are distributed across shards. For example, using a key like `tenant_id` allows you to control how Qdrant partitions the data. Each data point added to the collection will be assigned to a shard based on the value of this key, ensuring logical isolation of data.
```

Here’s how to choose the shard_number:

- **Match Shards to Nodes**: The number of shards should align with the number of nodes in your cluster to balance resource utilization and query performance.
- **Plan for Scalability**: Start with at least **2 shards per node** to allow room for future growth.
- **Future-Proofing**: Starting with around **12 shards** is a good rule of thumb. This setup allows your system to scale seamlessly from 1 to 12 nodes without requiring re-sharding.
- **Avoid Re-Sharding**: Re-sharding can be complex and requires creating a new collection, so it's best to plan ahead to minimize disruptions.

## Performance Optimization

Improving vector database performance is critical when dealing with large datasets and complex queries. By leveraging techniques like **query optimization**, **caching**, and **batch processing**, you can ensure fast response times and maintain efficiency even at scale.

### Query Optimization

Optimizing your queries is key to improving both search efficiency and accuracy. Qdrant provides several powerful techniques for streamlining your queries:

> ### 1. Prefiltering and Post-filtering
> 
> **Prefiltering**:
> 
> This applies filters **before** the search, narrowing down the dataset to focus on relevant records. It reduces the search space, making queries faster and more efficient.
> 
> Example:
> 
> ```python
> client.search(collection_name="my_collection",      
> query_vector=query_vector, 
> query_filter={ 
> "must": [ {"key": "price", 
>             "range": {"gte": 10, "lte": 200}} ]}
> )
> ```
> 
> ---
> 
> ---
> 
> **Post-filtering**:
> 
> This refines the results **after** the vector search, ensuring they meet specific conditions. It is ideal for applying additional criteria to already retrieved results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Since Qdrant users don't need this distinction.
